Over the last few years, it's been really exciting to see the emergence of strong ex-Muslim voices.
They've been some of the most marginalized voices on the world stage.
Just for leaving their religion
these individuals have risked being shunned, imprisoned, censored and killed.
Death threats come from lone assassins, angry mobs,
even state-sanctioned executions
in several Islamic countries.
Imagine facing these threats just because you don't believe in the religion assigned to you at birth without your consent.
Individuals who, despite these risks forge ahead and speak out face constant attempts to invalidate them.
Like folks who leave Christianity, folks who leave Islam are smeared with all the same lies.
It's falsely claimed they only left because of emotional reasons or bad personal experiences — implying their reasons lack substance.
It's falsely claimed that they were never true members of the religion.
They never believed. They were just faking it.
It's also falsely claimed that they never stopped believing — they're just acting out.
The contradictions in these assertions expose them for the straw clutching nonsense they are.
The fact is people express entirely
rational objections for leaving Islam
based on an accurate understanding
of its scripture and its implementation.
I want to recommend some channels run by people who articulate their rational objections with rigour, integrity, compassion and humour.
Although their focus is on Islam
these channels will speak to folks from any background who are interested in the mechanics of belief
and in the broad human themes
of freedom, authenticity, truth and justice.
The masked Arab is a treasure-house of research on subjects ranging from scientific claims to miracle stories to scriptural punishments
His mask says a lot about the risks
he faces in coming out.
Risks to his relationships and to his personal safety when he travels within the Muslim world.
In spite of those risks
there's no masking his dry wit
and muscular sense of irony.
He dives deep into the Quran and the hadith — the multi-authored accounts of the life of Islam's founder Muhammad.
And, like all the best channels, he credits his audience with intelligence and a capacity for independent thinking.
In his explorations of scriptural ideas and practices
he unpacks hidden layers of context, much of which would otherwise be inaccessible to non Arabic speakers
and backs it all up with video description boxes crammed with reference material.
He is a fantastic communicator. Well worth watching.
Abdullah Sameer was an ardent promoter of Islam for 15 years before his doubts were aroused by scriptural claims about the universe
that didn't add up.
He talks about his experiences with great candour and comments hilariously on a range of bizarre scriptural assertions
including outlandish declarations about bodily functions and sanitary procedures
that bear no relation to biology or hygiene or logic.
Like Muhammad's instruction to only use an odd number of stones to clean yourself after a call of nature
Other bogus claims concern rotting meat mountains shooting stars. The list goes on.
As Abdullah notes, these cobbled-together superstitions lay bare the human ignorance masking itself as divine intelligence.
Abdullah gives some thoughtful responses to all the common complaints that religion shouldn't be criticised and that all atheists are arrogant.
The personal attacks he's experienced for leaving Islam haven't diminished his humanity
and he remains an outspoken supporter of the religious freedoms of Muslims.
He's also a strong promoter of other ex-Muslim voices.
In marginalised groups, invisibility breeds invisibility.
When members stay silent they remain unaware of each other's existence
giving them all the illusion of aloneness.
Conversely
visibility breeds visibility.
As more members speak out even more members take courage to do the same.
By promoting other voices, Abdullah contributes substantially to that snowball effect.
And it's through him that I became
aware of Hassan Radwan.
Hassan was a devout Muslim teaching in an Islamic school, publishing Islamic story books and plays
and leading a Dawah society in the UK,
exploring scripture.
Hearing his fascinating story — recently updated with Arabic subtitles —
was an experience I wasn't quite prepared for.
He spoke with rare and disarming openness
about a personal journey
that moved from devotion and fellowship into confusion and disillusionment
touching on some heartbreaking moments.
Listening to him, it was clear this man had a huge heart.
His love of people shines through all his work.
It's a simple point, but one that bears repetition
Ideologies must be suspect when they profess peace love and compassion but condemn the most peaceful loving compassionate people.
Hassan's specialist education makes him an authoritative commentator on scriptural morality.
In a video I highly recommend
he recounts a story in the Quran about a boy who's killed —
not for anything he's done
but because Allah predicts he'll cause his parents sorrow when he grows up.
Hassan explores the implications of this story
Listening to Hassan's nuanced reflections and novel responses to arguments is a pleasure I come back to time after time.
The Ex-Muslims of North America has an ever-expanding roster of speakers
including Ali Rizvi, Sarah Haider, Muhammad Syed
Imtiaz Shams, Hiba Krisht, Ghada Ibrahim
and Armin Navabi.
There's a huge breadth of experience here.
Members speak about everything from their personal relationship to the hijab to the experience of converting to Islam in adult life.
The group also works to initiate meaningful exchanges with Muslims.
As footage on their channel shows
these encounters are frequently friendly
and bridge-building.
ironically some of the most consistent hostility they experience
comes from non-muslims whose black-and-white defense of Muslims allows no space for the stories of ex-Muslims.
The Ex-Muslims of North America are doing great work combating preconceptions
and preparing a softer safer landing for others.
Veedu Vidz aims to beat bigotry with a smile.
His irrepressible energy comes through in everything from his comedy skits to his calisthenics workout routines.
But as his friendly street debates demonstrate, it's a mistake to take him lightly.
He has a seriously sharp educated mind.
Like Abdullah, he hosts great interviews and raises awareness of religious persecution cases —
like the imprisonment of Asia Bibi
a Christian whose troubles began when she drank from a well while working as a farm hand
and was reportedly told by some Muslim women
that her Christian faith dirtied the water
and that she could only redeem herself
by converting to Islam.
The situation escalated with a mob
gathering, assaulting her
and threatening execution.
And it ended in her arrest and an official death sentence
Veeda Vidz gives insightful breakdowns of cases like Asia's
asking illuminating questions
and exposing fundamental hypocrisies.
He's a great social commentator —
entertaining and thought-provoking.
My final recommendation is Reason On Faith.
Raised in a branch of Islam called Ahmadiyya
in his early 20s, he wrote an entire book methodically listing his questions and criticisms.
He had the book printed and planned to distribute copies among his community
anticipating some honest discussion.
That discussion never materialised
Instead community leaders seized his copies of the book and after years of silence
said it wasn't worth a response.
Since then writing anonymously on his website reasononfaith.org
he’s continued to dissect religious claims, questions and arguments.
The volume of thought and research that goes into his work is staggering.
What's equally striking is his compassion and empathy.
His goal remains what it's always been —
establishing dialogue.
Finally this year he came out announcing his departure from Islam and making his official YouTube debut.
His video work embodies all the qualities
evident in his writing
eloquently unpacking a huge expense of topics from physical abuse to sexuality
to family attitudes to life after Islam.
Reason On Faith is an exciting new YouTube voice.
I'm looking forward to watching his channel grow.
The pressure on Muslims to remain silent continues
whether it's from open intimidation
or the sly insinuations of unreasonableness conveyed
in rhetorical questions — like:
‘Why do ex-Muslims have to talk about Islam?’
‘Why can't they keep their departure to themselves?’
As Hassan Radwan notes, when religions consume a person's entire life and identity
psychologically and socially
leaving can be a difficult and traumatic process.
Religions can implant damaging dehumanising ideas that need to be aired.
Reason On Faith notes that many people do stay silent.
Some falsely define themselves as nominal liberal or deficient Muslims
just to keep the peace.
He points out the indignity of living
muzzled inauthentic lives.
That indignity needs to stop.
Leaving a religion shouldn't leave people worried about their safety or about being pushed to society's margins.
Disagreement is a normal healthy part of life
and it's great to see a growing number
of people who've left Islam
reclaiming their voice and their place in the world.